Make sure it's fully plugged in. Okay, this is Ron
Shorn on Wednesday, June 2, 1993, at the
University of Texas at Austin Astronomy
Department, and I'm talking with Larry Trafton.
So, for the record, Larry, would you give your full
name? Lawrence Monroe Trafton. Okay. Okay. And
where were you born and when? Boston,
Massachusetts, 1938, July 31st. How did you first
get interested in astronomy? I can remember being
interested in astronomy in the second grade,
walking out on a cold winter's night somewhere in
Massachusetts from an Eaton's drugstore and
recognizing the constellation Orion in the
winter sky. which I just read about in a book
written for children on the constellations.
So that reaffirmed my faith in the reality of the
written material on constellations.
Where did you go to undergraduate school?
Caltech. What was your major? Astronomy. And what
year did you graduate? 1960. Why did you decide to
pick astronomy as a major rather than? Oh, I knew by
the time I was a teenager I wanted to be an
astronomer. I was an amateur, and I'd ground and
polished my own six-inch mirror, built my own
telescope. I was building and assembling
telescopes in the sixth grade and seventh grade.
So astronomy was one of my early interests. In
freshman year, I briefly considered geology and
some other majors, just because I knew I'd be
making this lifetime decision. I said, nah, I'll
stick with astronomy. Why did you go to Caltech?
Because they were the, I figured it was the best
school available in the world for an education in
astronomy. They ran, of course, Mount Wilson,
Mount Palomar, and had an excellent reputation.
Okay, where did you go to grad school? Also
Caltech, for the same reasons. Okay. Who was your
thesis advisor? Guido Munch. Did you pick him, or
did he pick you, or was it mutual? I went around the
department talking to the various professors
about a topic for my thesis. That previous summer I
worked at JPL doing a literature review on
Jupiter, and Guido mentioned a topic in planetary
atmospheres, solar system. And that picked my
interest. I was also very interested in the space
program at the time. And so I decided to pursue a
thesis in solar system rather than in some other
general field in astronomy.
OK. What did your thesis consist of? It consisted,
well, its title was pretty descriptive, Study of
Energy Balance in the Atmospheres of the Major
Planets. And its nucleus was applying the
pressure-induced opacity of hydrogen and helium
in the structure of the atmospheres of the major
planets. In other words, it, for the first time,
used this opacity as a thermal opacity for
determining the pressure-temperature
structure. Now,
after you got your PhD, you got a job, and you must
have been thinking about it before you were quite
finished. or was your first job after you got out of
grad school? At Kirtland Air Force Base in
Albuquerque, New Mexico, fulfilling an ROTC
commitment, Air Force ROTC, I was in charge of an
Earth-orbiting satellite with 12 or 13
experiments on board to measure the hazard that
solar flare particle radiation would pose to a
military astronaut, a so-called MAL, manned
orbiting vehicle astronaut. That program was
canceled by McNamara, I think in the late 60s, but
at the time the military had an interest in Ph.D.
level astronomers, particularly those
specializing in the solar system for that
purpose. Okay, and then where did you go after
that? University of Texas at Austin. How come
here? Well, this was actually one of three
choices. Another choice was with Kuiper's group
in Arizona. And the third choice may have been at
Flagstaff, as I recall. At Lowell? At Lowell, or
with Bob Weldy. At USGS? At USGS. And I figured that
I would need a place with a good computer, good
access to telescopes, a good research library.
And
I was communicating with Harlan Smith at the time.
And UT came across as being the most having the most
potential for a career in research. My goal was to
do research rather than to teach. How did you get in
touch with Harlan in the first place? Oh. I mean,
did you just meet somewhere, or did you write him a
letter? The first time I ever met Harlan Smith
was when I was having a restaurant on Route 3 in
Massachusetts, eating at a restaurant somewhere
between Boston and Cape Cod on Route 3. And out of
the blue, Guido Munch and Harlan Smith, I guess
they were returning from a meeting in Woods Hole or
something, recognized me and came over and sat
down. Guido introduced me to Harlan Smith, who at
the time, I think, was secretary of the AAS. And as I
recall, he invited me to come see, I can't remember
what, if ever I was in town. That's my first
recollection. When was that? That was about 1962.
Okay, when you were still a grad student. That's
right, when I was still a grad student. When did you
get your PhD? In 65. 65, okay. Was working that
summer at JPL the first time you got associated
with NASA money, or had you done some other stuff
before that? Of course, Caltech runs JPL, and I was
working there for the summer as a Caltech student I
think it was two summers that I worked there. I
think
it was right after my senior year. I think it was two
consecutive years in graduate school. Not after I
graduated, but after my first graduate years is
when I worked there. And one of those years, I
worked for Hiram Spinrad. I think it was the second
year. And the first year, I did a review on Jupiter
for Ray Newbern. What have you been doing since
you've been to Texas, if you can summarize the
general kind of work? Basically observational
and some theoretical research in astronomy,
almost entirely solar system astronomy,
specializing in the outer planets and their
atmospheres and those with satellites having
atmospheres, particularly high-resolution
spectroscopy. in more recent years, branching
out into the infrared and ultraviolet astronomy.
Since 1977, I'm involved with the Hubble Space
Telescope on the instrument definition team for
the high-resolution spectrograph. And just
recently, data has been coming down from the
Hubble. I'm involved not only as a guaranteed time
observer for my service on the team, but also as a
so-called general observer, competing with
other astronomers for time on the Hubble. It's
branched out.
What would you say was the... Well, let's start
this way. Do you feel planetary astronomy is part
of astronomy? Very definitely. And you consider
yourself an astronomer? Yes, even an
astrophysicist. Do you think real quote-unquote
astronomers look down on planetary astronomers?
If they're on... Another world looking towards
the Earth, yes. There are those that would say that
planetary astronomy is looked on as a pariah by
stellar and extragalactic. Well, there have been
periods in the history of astronomy where people
have thought that solar system astronomy has been
mined out. One of those was after the 1930s, for
example, when it was discovered that life didn't
exist on Mars. conditions were not hospitable to
life on some of the other planets. And so
astronomers at that time would naturally turn
their attention to more distant objects. Comets
were included as distant objects, even though now
we consider them as part of solar system
astronomy. So comets were always considered in
good favor by the mainstream astronomical
community. Of course, for the advent of NASA,
there's been a renaissance in planetary and solar
system astronomy, which is very
multidisciplinary. I mean, it involves not just
astronomers, but geologists, exobiologists,
astrochemists. And so I think there's a lot of
respect for solar system astronomy because it is
so multidisciplinary and is known, therefore,
well-known among a number of fields. But as for
your traditional astronomer, I think they do
consider planetary astronomy to be somewhat
different from what they do. What was planetary
astronomy like back in the 60s when you got into it?
Back in the 60s, it was high-resolution
spectroscopy with photographic plates,
ammoniated plates to increase sensitivity in the
near-infrared, namely beyond about 7,800
angstroms, 7,000 angstroms. pre-flash plates to
increase sensitivity in the visual region, or
baking plates in ovens to do the same thing. There
were also photomultipliers, the famous
RCA-31-whatever.
Oh, photomultiplier. 1P21. 1P21, that's it,
yeah. The 31-something was a later
photomultiplier, too. Single-channel devices
for scanning one wavelength at a time or for
obtaining the magnitudes through various
filters. Astronomy in those days was very much a
one-man thing. One man went out and he did the
entire project himself at the telescope over a
period of nights. He reduced the data and he
published the data. The equipment was less
expensive, less complicated. There were hardly
any computers either running or reducing the data
in those days. There was a lot of independency
among astronomers. Astronomers are very
independent people. The person next door could be
doing research which is totally unrelated to
yours. No consortia, such as with the Hubble's
nowadays. Very independent, very personal.
Funding was relatively easy to get, and it didn't
take a whole lot of funding to do a research
project. There was still a lot to be discovered,
particularly in planetary astronomy, which had
been neglected for so many years. And with the
advent of new telescopes like the one at McDonald,
the 2.7 meter, there was now guaranteed time to
spend a certain amount of telescope time on
astronomical observations. I think that may have
been, by the way, another factor in my coming to
Texas, the fact that I know I could get time on a big
telescope to do astronomical observations. Up to
that time, the number of big telescopes were
limited. And I remember doing some observations
from the 100-inch and 60-inch at Mount Wilson. But
you had to compete with the regular astronomers
for time to do astronomy in those days. Would you
say that NASA's bucks were critical to
reinvigorating planetary astronomy? Played an
enormous role. I mean, a number of telescopes were
built, the McDonnell Telescope, the IRTF, and
corresponding instrumentation designed
towards doing astronomy of extended sources, the
type of high-resolution spectroscopy, the kind
of astronomy that is useful for planetary work.
And also, about that time, the computer became
noticed. And I think the space program and NASA,
and NASA dollars in particular, have certainly
applied the spinoff from computers in the area of
astronomy in particular, ground-based
planetary astronomy. And then, of course,
there's been the advent of space-based planetary
astronomy, which is the IUE with its fantastic
record. I think IUE is still going after how many
years? I mean, that's not just planetary
astronomy, but that's where the first looks,
that's where the Joving Aurora was discovered and
some other areas in planetary astronomy.
Where do you think planetary astronomy is? What
shape is it in now, and which way is it going? Well,
planetary astronomy has really come a long way.
Spacecraft have visited all the planets except
Pluto, and there is planning for even a vast Pluto
flyby mission in the works. There's the Hubble
Space Telescope, which has finally been
launched, and looking not only at planets, but the
rest of astronomical objects. IUE is still going.
What there has been a great deceleration on is the
plans for future space missions, future missions
to do astronomy. The concept that's small,
better, cheaper, faster is now dominating the
huge flagship-type missions such as Galileo and
Ulysses. There's an enormous funding crunch
that's being felt at all levels in the government.
It's being felt in planetary or solar system
astronomy. There's been some competition with
the things like the space station, but I think
things like the space station are inevitable.
That's part of human destiny. I think most of the
friction between astronomers today, between
those varying the space station and unmanned
facilities, are based mainly on funding. They
assume that if the space station is canceled, for
example, there will be that much more money for
ground-based unmanned astronomy. I don't think
that necessarily follows. Funding is a big
problem, and it may get worse before it gets
better. But I still think there is a lot to do in
solar system science from the ground and from the
space. What do you consider the most worthwhile
thing you did in planetary astronomy? The most
worthwhile thing? Yeah, you might have to carve
something on your tombstone, would you? Oh, my
gosh. I guess one candidate is my thesis work,
recognizing the thermal, being able to calculate
the thermal structure of the planets. A lot of
little things, little discoveries here and there
concerning composition, various things such as
Neo's atmosphere or Titan, work in Pluto. It's
hard to put my finger on any one thing, but a whole
collection of little things. Just gradual
progress here and there from infrared, visible,
and ultra-valid astronomy. Progress along a
broad front at one step at a time in many different
areas. A lot of irons in the fire. In the past, there
was some concern that if planetary people got
their own sub-society, they would get cut off from
normal astronomy. Well, they did get the DPS, the
Division for Planetary Sciences, and their own
captive journal, Icarus. In your opinion, have
these been good things or bad things? Well, at the
time all this was happening, there was an
explosion in journals throughout science. I
mean, I think the number of journals increased by
more than an order of magnitude. the time Icarus
came online and the time it was adopted as being the
official journal of the society. So even within
the remainder of astronomy, there are the advent
of new journals. So I don't think that solar system
astronomy stands out as being different from
everybody else in this respect. I think this was
going on everywhere. And therefore, it doesn't
taint planetary astronomy in any way. Do
planetary astronomers talk to other types of
astronomers about the same as they did when you
started out, more or less? I would say at first
less, but now it's starting to be more and more
because things have developed so much in both
areas, in regular astronomy and planetary
astronomy, that people are starting to examine
the interface. Do other stars have planets? What
about Oort clouds around other stars? Can they be
studied from the vicinity of the Earth? People,
with the advent of advanced instrumentation,
advanced infrared instrumentation and
detectors, people have been able to study
observationally regions of star formation. And
some of the problems in planetary astronomy, the
big problem in planetary astronomy is what is the
origin of the solar system? How did it evolve? How
did the atmospheres and so forth evolve? And you
can ask the same questions about what's going on in
star formation. How are these stars being formed?
Are planets necessarily being formed around them
or not? So I see a collision course between the
scientific objectives of solar system astronomy
and astronomy in general, particularly that
involved with the interstellar medium and star
formation and infrared astronomy. I think that
ultimately there will be a merging of interests of
people. You may find people doing research in both
areas.
What's the current status of planetary astronomy
here at the University of Texas? Is it a little
separate kingdom? Is it growing, shrinking, just
staying out of the way, doing great things, or
what? It's a close-knit group. The planetary
group here is really close knit, but I would
characterize it as being largely isolated from
the rest of the department. I mean, people go and
sit in each other's seminars and listen to what's
going on. We have a solar system seminar. Now and
then we will get some people from the other
departments, but not very often. There is also an
intermediate group which deals with dynamics of
solar system bodies. They come to our group. We
know what each other is doing in the fields, but I
would say that there's probably a minor boundary
between that and those who... Who would you
consider the planetary group here in Austin?
Well, Bill Cochran, Anita Cochran, Ed Barker is
still doing research in planetary astronomy,
myself,
graduate Whipple next door. Fred Whipple. No, no,
Art Whipple. Judith Gorgi, a graduate student who
just got her Ph.D. Paul Hemingway. Jeffries does
some dynamical work. There is a sub-dynamical
group, but I would broadly include them in solar
system. Pete Shalas.
Perhaps Fred Benedict. What about Smolichowski?
And Smolichowski, of course, very definitely. So
you're no danger of extinction here or anything
like that? No, not in the near term, anyway.
What kind of NASA funding have you had over the
years? I don't need all the details. Well, out of
Brunk's program has been our main source. Were you
funded out of that block grant for a number of
years? Bronx Block grant out of the Planetary
Astronomy Program. That grant had been in place a
couple of years when I came here in 1969. And it was
converted to individual grants, I think, in 1991.
In 1991, it ended, and each one of us had to submit
individual grants. I think that was a step
backwards, because now we all have to do our own
administration. We all have to write, parallel
our own annual reports. and keep track of the
accounting. We can't use the economies of scale.
Those of us who are especially good at accounting
do the accounting for the entire block. Those of us
who are good at writing reports do the report
writing for the entire block. Everything has to be
done in parallel by everyone involved. And I think
NASA is getting less for its money as a result of
this reduction. It lost an economy of scale. I was
going to ask, do you have any gripes? And there's
one right there. There's one right there. Do you
think that people at headquarters really
understand what you're doing? I've had the
feeling in the past, talking with Brunk and with
Juergen Rahe, that they actually do keep up. They
actually do have an idea of what I'm doing. Also, in
Juergen's particular case, he is also an editor on
volumes, like this Time Variable Phenomena in the
Jovian System, where I publish some of my results.
So he gets to see some of the stuff I do, not only from
the reports I submit. And he's very interested in
getting these reports, so I assume he reads them.
But he also gets them from the literature that he's
involved with himself. I also had the feeling that
Brunk kept up with what I was doing. I noticed,
perhaps, maybe slowed down in the period that he
was involved very heavily with the development of
the IRTF. He seemed to get a little more remote from
what we and perhaps others were doing around that
period. But I understand he was heavily involved
with the IRTF at the time it was being built.
Well, here's two questions about the public. Do
you think planetary astronomers have done a good
job selling themselves to the public? I think that
many of them are doing a good job in selling
themselves to the public. We have something at
McDonald Observatory called Public Night, once a
week when the public can come in and hear a program
which includes a talk by the astronomer of the
night. And when I've been that astronomer, I've
given a 15-minute talk on what I've been doing in
solar system astronomy, and then I spend another
10 to 15 minutes answering questions. And those
questions, judging from the kind and tone of those
questions, people are very interested. in what's
going on. They genuinely are curious to know
what's going on in planetary astronomy. Back when
I was an undergraduate in the late 50s, I was a guide
at the Griffith Observatory and also experienced
the same genuine interest by the public in what
goes on in the stars and the fields. A really deep
curiosity I have a lot of faith in the public's
interest in astronomy and solar system astronomy
in particular, just based on my own personal
experiences. I've also attended star parties,
dropped in on star parties at McDonnell
Observatories and seen the long lines in front of
even the little telescopes way out there in the
middle of nowhere in West Texas.
There are people in the planetary astronomy field
who are seeking and in some cases getting money. by
studying hot current topics like ozone, for lack
thereof, search for extraterrestrial
intelligence, planets around other stars, and
killer asteroids. Do you think that's a good idea,
or do you think it'll backfire? Do you think some
are good and some aren't? I see no harm in a certain
amount of that, but I would not like to see that
become a large part of the focus of planetary
astronomy. I would not like to see NASA develop too
much towards looking back towards Earth. One of
their programs is called Mission to Planet Earth.
I think that would be a mistake to make that too big a
part of their program, because I think that would
lose a lot of the romance that the exploration of
space has among your average public. I think that
people do want to go out into space to know what's
out there and eventually to send people out there.
And I think if you make the program too practical,
too much like other programs that exist in the
nation, then that will actually hurt NASA. And by
parallel argument, I think it may even hurt
astronomy or planetary astronomy. If we make our
programs too much like they were prepared for the
front page of a newspaper rather than for
scholarly journal. There are some people that
feel that NASA never has given enough money for
analysis of the data once they got the pretty
pictures in. Have you found that to be true? That's
been a bone of contention in some quarters since
NASA started. At the very early days of the space
program, I definitely had the feeling that the
glory lay in the launches, not with what happened
after the launch, not with the data that was
collected. I saw this when I was in the Air Force.
The Air Force was launching its own satellites,
and there was a lot of glory and attention in
everything that led up to the launch, and a sudden
decline in interest in what happened afterwards.
I think NASA has been somewhat sensitive to this
argument and has generally tried to apply funds to
the extension of duration of missions and for the
reduction of data afterwards. But I think in many
cases that wasn't enough. I think that it's a lot
cheaper, for example, to keep funding a
spacecraft going around Venus while it's working
and getting additional data than it is to build
another spacecraft and send it there. I mean, if
it's working, it's cheap to continue getting
data. I'm glad to see that they still try to get data
from the voyages. that are near the, what is it, the
magnetopause of the solar system, and even now
finding out new things. Getting closer. However,
I think there's a tradeoff between people who want
to do new things and start new projects and people
who want to get full value for projects already
existing. And I think you will always see this
throughout human history in any field. And the
question is, is there going to be an equilibrium
line where everybody's going to be happy? No. But
my personal opinion is I would have liked to have
seen more support for reduction and careful
analysis of data that had already been obtained.
We found out a lot of things about the planets and
the solar system in general since the space age
began, both from space and from the ground. Can you
give a general idea of what planetary astronomy
has done? thing like, well, we now know there's
more than one kind of planet, or some statement
like that. I'm leaving it vague so you can make up
what you want to say. Well, one surprise for me was
to see the craters on absolutely everything
without an atmosphere in the solar system. I mean,
craters in the backside of Mercury, craters in the
satellites of Saturn, craters everywhere. I
thought the moon had a corner on the crater market
before the advent of the space program. This has
really hammered home how the planetesimals were
flying around in the early days of the solar system
when it was being formed, and has really
illuminated the conditions and the formation of
the solar system. We also now have a much better
idea of what the primordial solar nebula must have
been like based on isotope studies of the
terrestrial planets and studies of the outer
planets, and most recently with the composition
of Pluto and Triton are only real keys to what the
solar was out in the outer solar system, inside the
orb belt and such. So I think we have a much better
idea of how the solar system formed and the planets
formed, although a lot of unanswered questions.
How atmospheres formed and evolved and how
secondary atmospheres developed. I think we have
much, much better idea in the geology of the
surfaces of bodies, satellites, terrestrial
bodies throughout the solar system than we had
before. We have deeper insights into the
cryogenic atmospheres of Mars, Triton, and
Pluto, planets whose atmospheres are controlled
by the vapor pressure of ices on their surface, and
how these atmospheres might vary with seasons. We
have a whole lot better idea of what the detailed
composition of even complex organics are in
places like Titan, Jupiter, Saturn. even Venus.
We have so much data. Often we have the situation
when you answer one question, it raises two more
questions. And I think we've been running on a roll
unlike that. I think we're still in the situation.
Yes, we've learned an awful lot, but now we
recognize there's so much we don't understand,
and we would like to get some more answers. How much
of an effect do you think The fact that we haven't
found any traces of life anywhere else in the solar
system but Earth, and in particular not on Mars,
how much do you think that affected funding and
public interest for planetary astronomy? Oddly
enough, when I mentioned Horowitz experiments
for detecting life on Mars, explaining how
difficult it is to design an experiment to detect
life without making assumptions in what form that
life takes, I find that people are actually turned
on by the search for life. They're not turned off by
the failure so far to discover life. They're
fascinated by how would you design an experiment
to detect life in general? I mean, not life as we
know it. And the fascination, for example, that of
all the possible amino acids, only about half of
them have been found on Earth. another one of those
26 or 28 were found elsewhere and not found on
Earth, that would imply independent origin of
life. They still seem to find that fascinating. I
don't really see a lot of people turned off by the
failure so far to detect life. I see them almost
eagerly accepting the challenge to search in more
creative ways for it. It may not exist on Mars, but
maybe it once did. If so, what was it like? Could
there be fossilized evidence of that sitting
somewhere in the Martian rocks? People seem to be
fascinated by questions like that and would like
to see the answers.
I think, go ahead, what you just said. Harland
Smith is the best money raiser I've ever known.
Back in the, especially in the first 10 years that
I've been at UT, he, more than anybody else, has
been enormously successful in raising money and
going and personally talking to members of
Congress and lobbying for astronomy and for space
astronomy in particular. In fact, when I first
came to Texas, he told me the two things he wanted to
accomplish at UT was to develop a first-class
astronomy department and to introduce it into
space exploration and research. In the final
years, we were trying to raise money for the big
telescopes. He wasn't quite as successful. Yeah,
the 300-inch came awful close, I guess, the last
hour of the legislature or something. But it
seemed like he had a magic touch in those first 10 or
15 years. Well, it certainly helps if you can raise
money. Yes.